let's get deep and shallow at the same
damn time
the death of Christ contrasted to the
death of Socrates I assumed you were
Todd because this is the normal white
bread American way to teach the the
death of Jesus that he didn't do nothing
wrong that he was persecuted for no
reason that he was innocent right I
guess so
and in the book if you actually just
read the Gospels Jesus Christ is
completely utterly guilty of the charges
being laid against them right so I'm
looking at you I got a look at the
camera Jordan before I'm sorry to bother
you but no I can't really be turning
around
ah Jesus goes into the temple to cast
out the money changers he runs into the
room where the Pharisees are eating
dinner and he steals the food off their
table right he does all these things
that are obviously in a word impious he
utterly and thoroughly deserves to be
tried accused tried and convicted of
this crime and the gospel spells it out
for you there's no question that he's
guilty and yet everyone tells the story
it's all poor little Jesus he didn't do
nothing wrong
yeah okay so Socrates what I think
dramatically is the real impact of the
Euthyphro and this may not be obvious on
a first reading or may not be obvious if
you actually don't know how the story
ends hashtag spoilers Socrates is killed
Socrates is guilty Sardis guilty as
[ __ ]
Socrates like Jesus if you just read the
if you just read the story it's setting
out for us really clearly that he is
guilty of an empire that he is a heretic
and his particular type of heresy
you know who's worth talking about Miz a
Socratic method and free thinking and
progress and questioning your assumption
and all that stuff but we got a congress
here there's another source not enough
people read this was not at all I mean I
remember anyone in my university ever
mentioned this so this is Xena fons
memorabilia right and memorabilia in
this case it's actually memories of
Socrates if you like
the record of the things Socrates said
did so in this and other works by
Xenophon about Socrates you basically
he's defending Sartre the member of
Socrates
long story short he's trying to make it
seem that Socrates did nothing wrong
that Socrates was perfectly pious that
Socrates never corrupted the youth the
you know the different charge concerned
he was innocent I think exactly what
makes you do such an impactful work is
that showing you the opposite is that
Socrates is totally utterly guilty yeah
this this is a heretic this is heresy
and he is laughing at and mocking you
know the the religion of us of his day
and this is a society which I mean it's
an interesting society okay what else
what else killed while stood Socrates
have to die one he was the teacher of
alchemy at ease
that's totally outside of this
particular dialogue yeah it does come up
in both versions of the apology I think
all the the accounts of the trial and
death one of his students goes on to be
the most notorious turncoat imaginable
switching sides and fighting against
Athens becoming a he's a major general
and political leader and military leader
and he goes to fights against Athens for
the Spartans so that's a big deal and
even even someone like Xenophon you're
you're mad suspect bro you're a little
bit suss no suicides honest right yeah
so this is this is another student of
Socrates he becomes pro-spartan and even
Plato it's in there as throw Plato's a
little bit too he's a little bit too
pro-spartan you know it comes across
both so for some reason all of your
students are kind of on the wrong side
Socrates so even even in the apology
he's quick he makes it very clear that
he was on the right side when he's
telling his side of the story right so
politically you know he is a bit suspect
right yes mmm
yes sir sir sir sir sir what what what
do you use your bit why did saris have
to die
tell me well I mean part of it has to do
with democracy like the fact that when
you get people together as a group it
can lead to decisions
that mob justice yeah right and in what
I've read it seemed like just a couple
days after the people wrote and made the
decision kind of regretted what they did
thought it over there like right but
okay but look below sir this is super
super nice but don't you think that's
also what the Euthyphro is setting you
up for cuz Euthyphro is questioning what
is piety what is justice people think
they know but they don't really know I
think you got it it well when your
analysis you said well ultimately it's
just human it's a human convention it's
human beings coming together and
deciding this mm-hmm
guess what that means it means mob
justice it means Socrates has to die
right right it means that at whatever
time that you're living and you have to
you have to follow the rules you have to
go with what has been set down by humans
at the time and somewhat you know you
can be but you can be before your time
or after your time you know it could be
you can be in the wrong culture you know
okay okay okay so here's another
question for you okay
Jesus Batman what's the difference there
are stories people made up and they
believe in and have credence right yeah
no in Socrates is time you got the
legend of Zeus Zeus and Chronos or any
particular legend about Zeus right and
you've got new legends new stories like
Batman being made up at the theater that
for me that's reason number three why
Socrates has to die right there was a
comedy made up about Socrates and this
comedy was full of accusations
aspersions against his character
including I mean one of the main points
was that Socrates was just out for money
and he was corrupting the youth and you
know that you know that he was uh he was
a stereotypical surfaced he says he's
not motivated by money but really it's
all about making money out of peddling
philosophy and so on that's that's all
in there and this I mean this sets him
up this sets the public against him
ultimate is mentioned at his trial he
says well many of you have these
misconceptions though because there was
a hit play you know I get it today they
said it was like a hit man
yeah that's David I don't have a cinema
they have the theater they have live
theater and this is this is the big this
is the Batman this is the this is the
big you know pop-culture spectacle of
its day yeah
and Socrates was the butt of a few too
many jokes down the theater so he has to
die
yeah well the main difference today is
obviously people don't take Batman so
seriously that they would kill for him
and at the time people did take Jesus so
seriously that IIIi disagree I think
people do kill because of that I think
they do and you know I think I think it
it it shapes people's moral perception
and though I think people get into
fistfights and yeah there's exactly
their sense of justice is shaped by
stories like like Batman and you know I
took this up with my students in China I
spoke to them at quite some length like
you know because actually my students
China I presented with Plato we went
through Plato as it looked Plato he
thinks it's a really big deal what are
we teaching children in these legends in
these traditions it's one of the big
questions Plato ass because indeed when
you look at the ancient Greek legends
they're all horribly immoral in obvious
ways they're about like murdering your
own father right there's rape and you
know it just kind of makes no sense as
terms of an ethical teaching for
children so why are we teaching this
stuff to kids what do we expect from
kids this but you know I was asking the
Chinese students in China because you
know they're familiar with Batman but
from a distance okay so what do you guys
think about Batman why do Americans
teach this to children would you teach
this to children you as a parent or you
as a teacher you know what do you what
do you think is the the moral impacted
this on on kids you know so it's
interesting to lead them in that yeah
examination well I think I do think that
man has that kind of that kind of impact
ya know that is really interesting to
compare the cultures to like it
obviously here well in the Western world
it's totally cool to teach your kids
about Batman right well little kids walk
around in Batman costumes they know like
they have from an early age they get
this sense of what is justice and what
is you know killings of killing a bad
guys like right right right
really what justice is all about well
right in Batman Batman will beat people
up but he won't murder them yes you know
those lines no but those lines matter a
lot nobody's mentioned I think that I
think that often is exactly what you
know I'm no parents or the authors feel
Oh Batman he beats people up but then he
leaves them at the police station you
know he just beats them up and ties in
the right that's why the Joker never
gets
killed he keeps route you don't wraps up
the Joker in a chain and leaves in front
of the police now we are hoarse nobody
miss it's a true but look I mean really
the religion of Athens in this time also
isn't really the the religion of Zeus of
the most ancient mythology this is more
recent body of mythology which is you
know Homer you know the Odyssey and the
legends surrounding what was originally
a real war there was an actually
historical war between you know over
Helen of Troy make a long story short
you know war with King Priam and all
this other stuff they put together an
army and what-have-you and the opening
of Thucydides discusses that and the
Citadis discusses he gives estimates or
how many people were involved with the
war how many ships and he says he says
actually the scale of that war wasn't
terribly big ya know compared to Wars as
they progressed but nevertheless that's
really the Batman of its day and in a
lot of ways that's also the Jesus of its
day and so on and they had you know they
had formal religious festivals for what
were originally historical characters in
that drama in those in those events
specific Sayle or pardon me specific
sailors soldiers and archers and you
know some of that stuff is extent and
some of its not so that's very alien to
us the idea of but you know but it is it
was showing young man this is virtue you
know this is what it means to be a man
is to be like this specific soldier in
this specific war in as remembered in
the specific poem that you have to
memorize him recite and see acted out of
the theatres in the theater it really
was a religious ceremony in many ways
and again and that's why Socrates had to
die Socrates must die Euthyphro Socrates
must die for me that's the dramatic
tension of this is that if you're
reading it you know this is after the
clock is ticking down to this man being
executed and you know in a sense he's
being wrongfully executed it gets
horribly immoral don't get me wrong it's
like saying the Spanish Inquisition is
more or less totally more sure yeah but
he's guilty of the crime this is showing
you that he's guilty in exactly
right right you have to look at it in
the context of the time period whether
somebody is killed or not depends on the
time and the culture but I think but I
think all of us all of us like Socrates
want to transcend our times that's the
point you and I don't want to live in
the confines of a boy we've inherited
2018 I didn't know him it the reality of
1989 neither I mean that's that's the
tragedies were all struggling to
transcend our times right in their
history the mediocrity of the
assumptions cultural political economic
that were born takes so a lot to catch
up with what is you know in the public
opinion of what is right or wrong like
we're just for example the laws for the
internet have caught up to what has the
technology of today right so many
obvious things sure yeah
and it seems like nobody cares that's
that also stirs me I've been reading
I've been reading Aristotle's politics
again and just the way these books talk
about legislation it's heartbreaking cuz
you realize we live in a country day
where nobody cares about lives yeah they
just care about public opinion right
like now we've been we've been getting
emails from like updated privacy
policies from yeah every single like
social media thing that you public
opinion now is against Mark Zuckerberg
and even the junk mail from Parliament
because sorry I didn't even bother
showing you that junk mail from
Parliament they're all just sorry I
don't want to you such coarse language
but I mean they're all just Ambulance
changing they're all just chasing issues
that are in the media so we got junk
mail from Parliament like oh do you
think Canada should have a law against
plastic littering the ocean and this is
it someone in Parliament is just trying
to chase up public support like oh this
issues hot let me get my shingle out
there you know yeah yeah so you know I
mean it's it's fine though Sir Ian but
you know Aristotle in the politics he
says something well I think most people
would regard it as evil but I think it's
profoundly morally good he says look
there are these various Sciences but
when you really think about it think the
queen of the sciences the the mean the
ultimate science all of this is part is
Paul is politics
the ultimate whatever you want to talk
about the science is you know the the
apex of the sciences is politics
it all comes down to human social
reality relations human organization and
legislation and that's what all men of
talent and brilliance and ability must
you know bend their minds to war in bed
there are efforts towards worrying about
the future of their city and it's its
morality its legislation its politics
its vitality etc nobody thinks that way
in the modern world and what what today
is that the apex I mean you know I think
a lot but we'll say consumerism make a
lot of people say yeah you're altom
utley everything you're doing is bent
towards owning a fancy car or something
you know you know for other people I
mean okay for a few people it's
theoretical physics or the progress of
Medical Science I mean I know there's
some people have some other but even
people who are very altruistically
inclined you know they may they may say
it's charity work or washing the feet of
the poor or something but it's not it's
not politics in the market so nobody
cares yes right but even you know in a
time okay in ancient Athens this is when
people were motivated this right people
were caring about these things and right
all the real what you you use this
example already in your video you said
well you think factory farms should be
illegal another one you know I know ask
yourself eyes like agreed with me on
this leather shoes yeah whatever from
our perspective today the idea that this
is even a debate the morality and
legality the leather shoes is laughable
right so if we lived in a society where
people care you're right Socrates asked
the diet is gonna create a certain kind
of intense conflict but that would also
be a society where those debates would
would matter where they did involve I
mean I think the best and brightest and
so on yeah I was just reading sir a
brilliant article I emailed it to you
it's really brief from a career lawyer
who's now gonna waste the rest of her
life doing boring paperwork was this
really brief article about a fundamental
horrible ethical issue for First Nations
people these kids in a small town burnt
down basically like the lunatic asylum
that were faced to live forced to live
in so it wasn't on blue excellence what
was called a residential school in
Canada it's part of our history of
No and the saddest thing is reading this
article even in how it views itself this
is the most marginal question in
Canadian politics today Oh
genocide it's something credibly
marginal unthought-of
unresolved it's the bottom of the pile
of oh yeah it's fascinating it's
important it met like there are all
these practical consequence of an
including like in this case who actually
owns the land you know is linked to that
there are all kinds of consequences that
stole still matter today and nobody
cares right so yeah and the opposite I
mean the hyper-vigilant end of the
spectrum with this period of ancient
Athens were yeah it's dragging your own
father on on murder charges
you know dragging your own father
dragged in Socrates for impiety you know
it's it becomes you know hyper vigilant
in its in its concept of the law yeah
and then you know the next step after
that is sparta where the law you know
the law becomes a tyrant beyond all
imagining right yeah yeah I mean like I
think part of the reason I'm part of the
message of easy through is that like
government should be a safeguard so that
people don't become so pious that
they're like cruel like oh that's an
interesting okay I didn't get that as
this one yeah well yeah you know like I
think we don't we don't get the result
of what happened with youth he froze
indictment against his father but I
gather from what I've read that
generally at the time something like
this would have just been thrown right
that's right because it just it defied
common sense like why would you why
would you indict your own father for
this it's obviously you know we get it
we get it you you're so pious you're so
my point is it would have been probably
death penalty definitely events for the
the murderer anyway that's that's the
employee out go on yeah right yeah so so
instead of right instead of him getting
a fair trial before he was killed
yeah right oh yeah yeah yeah so you're
saying this gives a sense that the state
should be a check on thee yeah but but
then it's not the case of Socrates
between the two then these two cases
that are
you know they're talking with each other
from different sides of sides of the
trial you know a lot of Socrates is a
defendant and Euthyphro is the plaintiff
right right look Socrates you know he's
he's really a believer in personal
individual virtue and that that's what
he's going around trying to inspiring
people to get them motivated to to
reform themselves and I think that's a
good kind of you know he's a moral he's
a moralist he's a he's a street preacher
yes yes that's what he's really going
around doing and I think the next
generation you know Plato Aristotle etc
instead their obsession is with public
education and the idea that the state
can reform and all of society can
improve through public education not
Socratic method not one-on-one me asking
you so what do you think virtue is or
what do you think you know yeah you know
that this kind of thing but of Universal
mandatory public education I think I
mean what's interesting about democracy
whether you have a little bit of it or a
lot of it as soon as those you know
terrible life-and-death decisions are
being made by the mob or being a better
people it forces you to care
passionately about public education is
open how can we have this if we live in
a society where people believe in
witches and carry on witch trials right
which this kind of is I mean that's kind
of what's happening here yeah but it's
also you know what happened the United
States you know in the 17th century yeah
you know and so on so sir I recently had
a debate about education with an
anarcho-capitalist on this and I was
really having to hammer home to him cuz
he was he was selling the lie that
before government intervention like
public education was just fine before
the books before the public sector
before government got involved I was
saying to him no what do you mean fine
everyone's illiterate people believe in
Demon's people literally carry on would
you what how do you find fine have you
been to Saudi Arabia what's fine like
you know so you know III think that is
an interesting thing is that sharing
power with the masses or entirely
handing over the masses then puts you
into a crisis of a public education I
mean you know do you know do you trust
the people do you trust a juror
of your peers and this 500 of your peers
would be 3,000 your peers do you trust
them to judge you and to judge you
kindly honestly or would you rather have
one judge one expression I you know I
know the terror of that I'm sorry but my
divorce proceedings with my ex-wife it's
unbelievably awful but you know first
yeah has this power over me on the basis
I mean this person knows me less than a
viewer on my youtube channel you think
she could get a better sense of my
character for watching but you to be ok
there's no consideration given to me or
Who I am or have you sorry you know and
it's all hangs on one person's character
and one person's attention span and
their care and their their kindness
sympathy right and their their sympathy
and their fairness and their their good
judgment and even if even a reasonably
good judge has got to be wrong once in a
while yeah but do you want to stand
there like Socrates and say don't kill
me I'm a heretic but you know what it's
for the greater good but you should
value that's really this about it but
you should value my dissent yeah I'm I'm
a heretic who's making your society
stronger this is his theory of the
gadfly look I may be nipping at you I
may be writing at you but it's but it's
making you it's making you stay yeah
yeah I mean I guess the only the answer
is public education er that's how I
would feel more comfortable with having
the masses determined right whether I'm
guilty of a crime or not
you know so if I know that they've been
through this public education system
that supposedly should teach them what
is piety but that's but that's not what
comes out with Plato right because
Plato's obsession is that what you have
to teach the next generation is good and
evil and in a sense that that even makes
sense of course it's probably just
because Plato's it in a maniac or
whatever Plato's a really eccentric guy
the more you read them but you know if
you think about it that is itself it's
understandable just as a response to the
death of Socrates you know like what
people need to know is good and evil
they don't need Socrates asking you can
you explain to me what skippin evil they
mean that means the government to set
this down in public education everyone's
got to know good and evil and everyone's
got to read the same story book we got
to replace
man with a story that really explains
you good evil with no ambiguity that's
what that's what what Plato that's good
what the next revision did and of course
you don't and then the next generation
after that is is Aristotle who basically
pisses all over everything played on to
say yeah yeah and the next the next
generation after that isn't extent it
seems like Kearney ADIZ was a really
brilliant philosopher on this exact
issue of justice because Kearney ADIZ
his philosophy is described in Cicero
but it's not it's not extinct wasn't
preserved by the Christian Church I'm
guessing it was a little too scary from
a Christian perspective but yeah so it
kept on turning and then it's gone and
then it's the Dark Age when we all know
the meaning of justice is taking people
and literally breaking them on the wheel
literally torturing them to death in the
public square in the name of a religion
where your God died in a public
execution the most elite Socrates died
by drinking hemlock so look man I mean
guys I'm gonna so I don't even know is
this gonna go on your channel you can
edit this you can sit or not it's your
call but look you know uh you don't ask
you why why celebrate Christmas if you
guys want to you can revive there's an
ancient you know festival for the the
birthday of Socrates but I mean you know
you can replace Chris but then all these
attempts made to replace Christmas with
something meaningful like Kwanzaa and
you know what have you but I mean really
I think you know this isn't it it is a
tremendously meaningful story to tell
and you can teach it to your children
it's a lot more meaningful than you know
Jesus being born in a manger or
something and I mean in many ways the
story of the death of Socrates it's the
real Jesus before Jesus it's that that
sense of you know all of society there's
the there's the sin for this for this
death you know complicit all right any
less thoughts no